From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Ketrof. This is the daily.
[Music]
For most Americans, the government's
monthly jobs number was a pretty dull
statistic
until a few days ago when President
Trump angrily fired the person
responsible for producing it, the
commissioner of the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.
Now, from Washington to Wall Street,
everyone's wondering whether you can
still trust federal statistics if the
president is willing to just get rid of
people who give him facts he doesn't
like.
Today, I speak with my colleague Ben
Castleman about how the government's
economic data suddenly turned into a
national drama.
[Applause]
It's Tuesday, August 5th.
[Music]
Ben, I just want to start by
acknowledging that we may be on the
brink of the nerdiest daily episode
ever, but I am really excited to have
you on for this because honestly, this
is kind of your Super Bowl. I mean you
have made a career of labor numbers and
this time we didn't just get job
numbers. There was extreme drama around
these job numbers.
So I want to get into it. How did this
whole fight start?
Uh so every month the Bureau of Labor
Statistics or the BLS puts out this big
report on jobs, hiring, employment,
unemployment from the previous month.
And it is my Super Bowl 12 times a year.
>> Lucky for you,
>> it's my Super Bowl. It's a Super Bowl
for a lot of econ nerds around the
country. And and that's because this is
in some ways the most important single
number or single set of numbers that we
get about the economy each month. It
matters to regular people, right? This
is about whether people have jobs and
can find jobs. It's important to policy
makers at the Federal Reserve who are
trying to decide whether they should
raise or lower interest rates. It's a
hugely important political number that
tells us as well as any other set of
numbers whether the president is
succeeding or failing in his management
of the economy. And so this is a set of
numbers that we all sort of drill down
on the moment they come out. They hit
the website at 8:30 and we're all sort
of frantically refreshing to see what
these numbers show. And this time we
refresh the website and it says 73,000
jobs were added in July, which is not
great.
It was weaker than forecasters had
anticipated, but it was not a crushing
blow.
>> The numbers are not catastrophic, but
they're not great either.
>> That's right. but with one big caveat
which is that they also revised the jobs
for May and for June the last two months
and they revised those down by a quarter
million jobs. Hm.
>> So, we thought we had added around
150,000 jobs a month in May and in June,
which would have been solid numbers. We
we had reacted to them and said, "These
are great numbers,
>> right?"
>> Those got revised down to more like
15,000 jobs in each of those two months.
>> Wow. So all of a sudden, this picture
that we had of the labor market, this
labor market that was chugging along,
that was resilient, that had shown sort
of no signs of cracking despite tariffs
and uncertainty and all the other stuff
that we've been talking about. All of a
sudden, it looks like, well, maybe there
were deeper cracks than we had realized.
Yeah. The last time that you were on the
show, you said this is Trump's economy,
right? He's put his stamp on it with
tariffs, with immigration policy. He
owns it if it soarses or if it tanks.
And you're saying this is the first sign
we're maybe getting now that the economy
might be wobbling. Yeah, that's right.
And so these numbers come out.
>> Rick Santella here with the big breaking
news of the morning, the big July job
jobs report. non-farm payrolls up
73,000.
Definitely a bit light, but
>> everybody sort of reacts to them, starts
to try to figure out what they mean.
>> Look, I think this is all a result, this
disappointing number is a result of all
the turmoil over tariffs and and trade
wars.
>> I think this is more about the Federal
Reserve. Again, we've got a bifurcated
economy.
>> And then a few hours later around 2:00
in the afternoon, the president puts out
this post on Truth Social, his social
media site. It's this long post,
Natalie, is I taking up like my full
screen here.
>> Okay, let's hear it.
>> In which he says, quote, I was just
informed that our country's quote jobs
numbers are being produced by a Biden
appointee, Dr. Erica McInterer, the
commissioner of labor statistics, who
faked the jobs numbers before the
election to try and boost Kamala's
chances of victory.
>> This is where the drama comes in.
>> This is the drama. He goes on in this to
basically accuse Dr. McInterer of
rigging the numbers for political
reasons and says that he has directed
his team to fire her which they promptly
do.
>> So it basically looks like he's saying
he didn't like the numbers and so he's
firing the person responsible for them.
>> That's certainly what it looked like to
me and I think to most people who were
watching this. But that's not the story
that his adviserss told when they came
out and started giving interviews later
on Friday and on the Sunday shows over
the weekend.
>> And joining me now is the director of
the White House National Economic
Council, Kevin Hasset. Mr. Hasset,
welcome to Meet the Press.
>> We saw Kevin Hasset, who's one of his
top economic adviserss, came out and
said, "No, no, this isn't that the
president didn't like the numbers. It's
that there have been these big
revisions." Well, what we've seen over
the last few years is uh massive
revisions to the jobs numbers. In fact,
>> the numbers that are being put out by
the BLS are unreliable and this
commissioner was clearly not doing a
good job.
>> Isn't this the very definition of
shooting the messenger?
>> No, absolutely not. I mean, the bottom
line is that there were people involved
in creating these numbers. And if I were
running the BLS and I had a number that
was a huge uh politically important
provision, actually revisions should be
smaller, right? because computers are
better and so on, then I would have a
really long report explaining exactly
what happened. And we didn't get that.
>> He says at one point, to make sure that
the data are transparent and as reliable
as possible, we're going to get highly
qualified people in there that have a
fresh start and a fresh set of eyes on
the problem.
>> So, is the president prepared to fire
anyone who reports data that he
disagrees with?
>> No, absolutely not. The president wants
his own people there so that when we see
the numbers, they're more transparent
and more reliable. And if there are big
changes and big revisions, we expect
more big revisions for the jobs data in
September, for example, then we want to
know why. We want people to explain it
to us.
>> So their version of it is, look, there
were these big revisions. Clearly, we've
gotten the numbers wrong, and so we're
going to bring in our own people who are
going to do a better job of getting
these numbers right. How unprecedented
is this? Like has it happened before?
>> It's really unprecedented in the
centurylong history of the US economic
statistics system. There are some
earlier examples along the way that have
some parallels here. If you go back,
President Hoover sort of pushed out or
or retired the equivalent of the BLS
commissioner at the time. Nixon did a
version of this as well. But we've never
seen anything like this where there's a
bad jobs report, the president is mad
about it, he fires the head of the
statistical agency. I mean, I I don't
know, Natalie, you used to be an
economics reporter. Sure did.
>> You've been in this world for a while,
but I suspect you can't name a whole lot
of commissioners of labor statistics.
>> Not a one.
>> And most people couldn't either, right?
This is not a high-profile job. Sure.
>> Dr. McInturer was a longtime civil
servant at the Census Bureau and in
other agencies. She's sort of known as
a, you know, data nerds data nerd. She's
not somebody I think you would have ever
expected to be the subject of a
president's social media post.
>> And is she crunching the numbers
herself? I mean, I understand you're
saying Trump is kind of laying the blame
at her feet in a really pointed way.
>> No, very much not. The commissioner is
the only political appointee at the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Everybody
else is a career employee, most of whom
are there for many years across multiple
administrations. These are the people
who collect the data, who crunch the
data, who put it together, and the
commissioner doesn't even see the
numbers until they are finalized. And
numerous people at the bureau and who
are have been at the bureau in the past
have told me there's just no way that a
commissioner could futs with these
numbers without a whole host of people
knowing about it. Many of whom would
raise heaven and earth to stop them from
doing that.
>> Okay. So I want to actually hear how the
numbers are put together. What's the
actual process? So the monthly jobs
numbers are based on a survey of more
than a 100,000
businesses and other employers across
some 600,000
work sites in the country. So I mean
this can be on the phone, it can be
online. There are various methods, but
they're asking employers how many people
did you have on payroll during this
period and how many hours did they work
and how much money were they paid? And
those numbers get aggregated together
and added up to come up with a jobs
number. But we're trying to measure a
enormous $30 trillion economy with 160
million employees. There's a lot that
goes into trying to tabulate those
numbers to try to fill in the missing
blanks. And that first number that comes
out that we all pay so much attention to
is an estimate. It's a preliminary
estimate, right?
>> And we update it over time as we get
more complete numbers and and sometimes
those updates can be pretty substantial.
>> These are the revisions, right?
>> These are the revisions.
>> How should we think about those, Ben?
Because I'm just wondering for people
who are not intimately familiar with
this data set. It may seem odd that
there are really dramatic changes to
data that is I mean, you've been saying
so important. Yeah, I think that's
completely understandable. I think if
you hear we thought there were 150,000
jobs added in June and now we say there
are 15,000 jobs added that you say well
what good is any of this anyway. But
it's important to understand that there
are some reasons for these big revisions
like what as I said big survey not
everybody responds to the survey right
away over the course of the next two
months more data becomes available and
so we get a more complete read and in
normal times this really works pretty
well. You miss a little bit up one month
you miss a little bit down one month but
over time it pretty much smooths out.
The trick is that at times when the
economy is changing a lot, it can be
difficult to get a clear read, right? It
may be that those people who didn't
respond to the survey the first time
don't look like the people who did
respond. Maybe the reason they didn't
respond to the survey was that they were
scrambling to keep the lights on
>> and so they were cutting jobs and they
can't even deal with the survey. maybe
those businesses shut down altogether
and the reason they didn't respond was
not that they hadn't gotten around to it
yet, but that they don't exist anymore.
And so once we get all of the
information in, we learn, ooh, actually,
we did not add as many jobs as we
thought. And so we know that we have a
harder time picking up what's happening
at turning points of the economy, which
is part of why when these numbers came
out on Friday, a lot of people said,
"Uh-oh,
maybe this suggests that we are at one
of these turning points. Maybe this
suggests that the economy is really
taking a turn for the worse.
>> So you have these Trump aids pointing to
the revision saying, "Look, why are
these so big?" And and what you're
saying is one of the reasons they may be
so big is that things have just been
really volatile recently. I assume we've
seen things that are creating a lot of
noise. They're creating a lot of noise
and anything that creates a lot of noise
just makes it more difficult to measure
the economy in real time.
>> But just to be clear, is there anything
to suggest that these numbers themselves
are wrong?
>> It depends what you mean by wrong.
If what you mean is that these numbers
are not a perfect reflection of the
actual number of jobs in this country,
then yes, because all of these numbers
are wrong when they first come out.
They're estimates, but they are the best
estimates using the best methods that we
have available to us. But remember, the
president didn't just say wrong. He said
rigged.
He said these numbers were rigged out of
political bias against him. And there's
absolutely no evidence for that. But I
think that that suggestion by the
president is what has so many people so
alarmed right now.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
So, you said, Ben, that this has a lot
of people alarmed. Just explain to me
why this matters so much to so many
people. It matters because it gets to
the real core of how we understand our
economy and to the credibility of the US
government. And I think we have seen in
history what happens when that
confidence is eroded. not so much in
this country but in other countries.
>> You know the canonical example of this I
think is Argentina where in the earlier
part of this century they fired the
people responsible for putting out their
inflation numbers when the inflation
numbers were higher than they wanted,
which certainly sounds a little bit
familiar right in this moment. and then
kept putting out low inflation numbers
that were just not credible to anyone.
They were not credible to anyone in the
country and they were not credible to
anybody outside of the country to the
point that the international community
basically stopped paying any attention
to Argentina's official inflation
numbers altogether.
>> And that had real consequences in
Argentina. you know, they were borrowing
money internationally and investors
basically started charging a higher
premium to lend them money because they
didn't trust the inflation numbers and
they didn't trust the government and
that contributed to a really crippling
debt crisis and default in Argentina.
>> Investors were basically saying, "We
don't trust that you have a handle on
this. There's no yard stick that we can
really point to and know that it's real.
If you lie to your bank about your
income, they're probably not going to
give you a very good rate on your
mortgage. Sure. And that's basically
what we're talking about here. We saw
this in Greece as well, where the
government fudged the numbers on their
deficit for years to try to meet certain
European Union targets, which eventually
led to a massive debt crisis there. And
what's worse, when they brought in an
economist to run their statistical
agency to kind of clean things up and he
told the truth about what the numbers
were, that ran a foul of the authorities
there and they criminally prosecuted him
for years. He's still fighting those
cases.
Okay. You've given us these two
examples, Ben, where it seems pretty
clear that the governments in these two
cases were deliberately obscuring a very
bad economic reality. But is that
happening here? Like, is that what we're
headed for? Well, so it's certainly not
where we are now. All of our evidence is
that the data that's been put out by the
administration so far is as trustworthy
as ever. and the person who's in charge
of the BLS now who took over on an
acting basis after the commissioner was
pushed out. He's a longtime civil
servant. He's very widely and well
regarded. I don't think there's any
suggestion that he would cook the books.
And as we discussed before, right, the
numbers are actually produced by this
legion of civil servants beneath the
surface. And there's no reason to think
that any of them are going to change the
way they do things either. I think the
concern is the president's going to name
a new commissioner. We don't know who
that is yet. Maybe it will be somebody
extremely qualified. I I will say that
the person who ran the BLS in Trump's
first term, a man named Bill Beach, was
very widely regarded. He has come out
and condemned this firing. But if
somebody like him is put into place
again, I think that a lot of these
concerns will be mitigated to a degree.
But I think the idea is out there now.
And the concern is that if the president
can fire one person for putting out
numbers he doesn't like, maybe he fires
another and and maybe we end up in a
situation where this keeps going until
he gets numbers that he likes.
>> You're saying basically that either way,
Trump has at the very least created the
impression that he's willing to fire you
if you produce numbers that are not what
he wants to see. I guess my question has
been should we really expect, you know,
him to appoint somebody who comes in and
then just kind of revises the numbers
way upward? Like, wouldn't that be
extremely obvious? No one would trust
that. Yeah. I mean, look, in theory,
right, he could appoint some longtime
loyalist to come in who just says like,
"From now on, we added 250,000 jobs a
month." I mean, something sort of very
Soviet, right? And I don't think that's
likely. It would be extremely obvious.
>> Sure.
>> I'm not predicting anything. You and I
may be sitting here in 6 weeks time
talking about that scenario, but I I'm
not I'm not predicting that.
>> You're not there yet.
>> I'm not there. I I think there's another
version of this though that is a little
bit softer, but I I think is in some
ways just as concerning where the
president brings in somebody who maybe
isn't an obvious yes man, but who
doesn't uphold the traditions of these
agencies and that that leads over time
to a diminishment of staff morale to
increased turnover. you know, a lot of
these people who work in these places
have been there for a long time. They
don't necessarily make that much money.
We've already seen a lot of turnover and
that it just eats away at the expertise
and ultimately at the quality of these
numbers to a point that people just sort
of lose faith in them as being useful
gauges of the economy anymore. M and you
know I I don't think it's lost on
anybody that this is a pattern that has
played out in a lot of places within the
federal government under this president.
You know, we've seen this in the
sciences and in health in the EPA and we
haven't seen that in this way at the
statistical agencies yet, but it doesn't
take that much to imagine it happening.
Okay, Ben, we've been talking about the
rhetoric about the battle over this
data, but I I want to now just turn back
to the data itself.
Give me a really cleareyed analysis of
what these numbers say about where we
are economically right now. Give us our
bearings.
So, I think you alluded at the beginning
of the episode here, right, to the last
time we talked and we talked about how
this was Trump's economy now, but there
really wasn't much evidence that these
policies, tariffs and immigration and
uncertainty and all of this were really
hurting the economy in a significant
way. I think we can't say that anymore.
That's not just because of the jobs
numbers. It's also because of some of
the numbers that we got on consumer
spending last week that we've gotten on
business investment. we started to see
some signs that various policies that
the president has adopted are starting
to sort of eat away at the momentum in
the economy.
But we also still are in a place where
we are not seeing sort of deep chasms
forming in the economy. The unemployment
rate is still low. We're not in a
recession. And very few forecasters that
I talked to think that we're headed for
one anytime imminently. And so although
the data that we got last week suggests
that the economy is in worse shape than
we had known going into it, I don't know
that it changes the sort of fundamental
story of an economy that has proved
pretty resilient but faces a lot of
challenges.
>> Huh. That is so interesting and honestly
quite surprising given that we've just
spent all this time talking about the
intense backlash from Trump that these
numbers elicited. Yeah. In some ways,
this is why the president's reaction on
Friday was so surprising. Beyond the
shock of what he was doing, it just
seemed sort of disproportionate to the
actual reality of the news.
>> Let's just start with these numbers
because the figure that we got that was
below all estimates in the Bloomberg
survey of economy.
>> You know, in the initial hours after the
report came out,
>> we've seen positive job growth for sure
and they've been for the American
workforce, nativeorn workers. A lot of
the president's aids were, you know, out
on TV and they were doing their usual
thing. They were doing their usual sort
of spin about how these numbers weren't
really so bad.
>> You know, a lot of that data comes pre
one big beautiful bill. Now that we have
one big beautiful bill and we have a
better sense of where the taxes are
going, I think we're going to see a much
uh we're going to see more investment
and and like you said, it's a relatively
small number. So I don't I don't read
terribly
>> and you know, they were making a pretty
good case. There was certainly a lot of
softness in these numbers. There's no
getting around that. Uh these were not
the numbers the White House was hoping
for. But
>> we've been hearing a lot about
uncertainty of the last few months, but
that's all resolved now. So, it's all
going to get much much better from here.
>> There were plenty of arguments you could
make for why they weren't really so
terrible. And I I think on some basic
level, what we're left with here is this
economy in stasis where companies aren't
really firing workers, but they're not
really hiring them yet either. where,
you know, consumers are still spending
and sales are still there, but companies
are reluctant to make big investments,
big bets that that's going to continue
going forward. Some of that may be
because of tariffs. Some of that may be
because of immigration. Some of that may
be because of just sort of the general
chaos of the first 6 months of the year,
>> right?
>> There's clearly some real uncertainty
about where the economy goes from here.
But beneath all of the noise, beneath
all of the drama, as you put it from
Friday, we have an economy that based on
the numbers is still relatively okay.
And if we were just talking about the
numbers instead of the people
responsible for producing them,
Natalie, I'm not sure we would be having
this conversation today.
[Music]
Well, Ben, that said, it was great to
have you on the show.
>> Thanks for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
While Texas are waiting for relief,
Republican leaders are redrawing maps to
silence voters, hijack our democracy.
>> The Democratic lawmakers who fled Texas
on Sunday achieved their goal of
preventing a major redesign of
congressional maps in the state for now.
Without a two-thirds quorum, the Texas
legislature could not hold a vote on the
new maps, which Republicans hope will
flip five seats from Democrats to GOP
control.
President Trump had called for the
redrawing of the districts in order to
lock in Republican control over the
House in the next midterm elections, but
the Texas state house speaker said that
the vote was just on hold and wouldn't
be prevented from going through. I will
immediately sign the warrants for the
civil arrest of the members who have
said they will not be here.
>> He also issued civil arrest warrants for
Democrats who left the state. Governor
Greg Abbott of Texas said on Monday that
he ordered state law enforcement to
detain and return any member who quote
abandoned their duty to Texans. He also
threatened to try to remove the missing
Democrats from their posts. I believe
they have forfeited their seats in the
state legislature because they are not
doing the job they were elected to do.
>> And in what officials are calling the
largest environmental settlement ever
won by a US state, three major chemical
companies agreed on Monday to pay New
Jersey $875 million to settle claims
linked to pollution from so-called
forever chemicals.
There are nearly 15,000 of those
chemicals in existence and they're found
in things like non-stick cookware, water
repellent clothing, and stain resistant
carpets, and they've been linked to low
birth weight, birth defects, and
increased risk of some cancers. The New
Jersey Attorney General said the state
had some of the highest levels of those
chemicals in the country. Under the
deal, the companies Kimors, Dupant, and
Corteva have to fund the cleanup of four
former industrial sites which were once
used to manufacture components for
explosives as well as dyes and
refrigerants.
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Nevetski, Claire Tenniscetter, and
Michael Simon Johnson. It was edited by
MJ Davis Lynn and Liz O Balin with help
from Mike Benois. Research help by Susan
Lee. Contains original music by Dan
Powell, Marian Lozano, and Rowan
Nemisto. And was engineered by Chris
Wood. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg
and Ben Lansberg of Wonderland.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you tomorrow.
[Music]